List all sub-statuses (#2526)
theforeman/foreman-documentation: guides/common/modules/con_host-substatus-overview.adoc

[id="host-substatus-overview_{context}"]
= Host Sub-status Overview

> A sub-status monitors only a part of host's capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A sub-status monitors only a part of a host's capabilities.
```

Author: Applied.

{Project} contains the following sub-statuses:

Configuration::
This sub-status is only relevant if {Project} uses a configuration management system like Ansible, Puppet, or Salt.
+

> Possible values:

Reviewer 2: I think the values defined are here:
https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/blob/b5e5dfb4108d36210a1691af45d6d8b980f4f6d1/app/models/host_status/configuration_status.rb#L4
So https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/blob/b5e5dfb4108d36210a1691af45d6d8b980f4f6d1/app/models/config_report.rb#L2

Perhaps the labels are a better way:
https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/blob/b5e5dfb4108d36210a1691af45d6d8b980f4f6d1/app/models/host_status/configuration_status.rb#L65-L83

// TODO: numbers
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Value | Global Host Status | Number
| Active | OK | 0
| Pending | OK | 1
| No changes | OK | 2
| No reports | OK / Warning | 3
| Out of sync | Warning | 4

> | Error | Error | 5

Reviewer 2: I don't think there are numbers. At most there are bit numbers (since the total value is a number and things are calculated bitwise.

You probably convert https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/blob/b5e5dfb4108d36210a1691af45d6d8b980f4f6d1/app/models/host_status/configuration_status.rb#L43-L59

reading this, wouldn't it make more sense to flip it and start with the global status and explain what may be the case?

Author: Edit: I misunderstood the comment. Removing numbers from this sub-status.

|===
+

> Additional information about the sub-status values:

Reviewer 2: Reading the source I get the impression that `ConfigurationStatus` doesn't have a substatus.

Author: I meant that Configuration status itself is a host sub-status, will try to reword to convey the message better.

+
* *Active*: During the last run, some resources were applied.
* *Pending*: During the last run, some resources would be applied but your configuration management integration was configured to run in `noop` mode.
* *No changes*: During the last run, nothing changed.
* *No reports*: This can be both a *Warning* or *OK* status.
When there are no reports but the host uses an associated configuration management proxy or the `always_show_configuration_status` setting is set to `true`, it maps to *Warning*.
Otherwise it maps to *OK*.
* *Error*: This indicates an error during configuration.
For example, a run failed to install a package.
* *Out of sync*: A configuration report was not received within the expected interval, based on the `outofsync_interval` setting.
Reports are identified by an origin and can have different intervals based upon it.

Build::

> This sub-status is only relevant for managed hosts, hosts registered through global registration, and when {Project} runs in unattended mode.

Reviewer 2: Unattended mode is gone and now always one.
```suggestion
This sub-status is only relevant for managed hosts or hosts registered through global registration.
```

+
Possible values:

> // TODO: numbers

Reviewer 2: Here it's easier to understand what's going on:
https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/blob/b5e5dfb4108d36210a1691af45d6d8b980f4f6d1/app/models/host_status/build_status.rb#L3-L10

+
[options="header"]
|===
| Value | Global Host Status | Number
| Pending | OK | 0
| Built | OK | 0
|===

ifdef::satellite,orcharhino[]
Execution::

> Status of the last completed remote excution job or ansible job.

Reviewer 2: AFAIK Ansible jobs are REX jobs. It's also available everywhere, but with `foreman-el` and `foreman-deb` you can add a note that you need to have the REX plugin installed. With others it's always present.

+
Possible values:

> // TODO: Values, numbers

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/theforeman/foreman_remote_execution/blob/master/app/models/host_status/execution_status.rb

Author: Thank you for linking the file, but I am a bit perplexed here. both QUEUED and RUNNING have label "Unknown execution status", is this what is actually displayed in the UI? Also does that mean that this value can have both 2 and 3 assigned as number depending on what the actual status is?

+
[options="header"]
|===
| Value | Global Host Status | Number
| Job completed succssfully | OK | 0
| Job not completed successfully | Error | 0
|===

> Compliance::

Reviewer 2: Compliance should be hidden on `foreman-deb`. On others it's always optional AFAIK.

Author: Fixed, thank you.

Indicates if the host is compliant with OpenSCAP policies.
+

> Possible values:

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/theforeman/foreman_openscap/blob/master/app/models/foreman_openscap/oval_status.rb

Author: So OVAL status and Compliance status are the same?

+
[options="header"]
|===
| Value | Global Host Status | Number
| Compliant | OK | 0
| Inconclusive | Warning | 1
| At least one incompliant | Error | 2
|===

> Inventory::

Reviewer 2: The rh_cloud plugin depends on Katello. I don't know if orcharhino ships it. Satellite enables it by default, in Katello it's optional.

Reviewer 3: Yes, orcharhino ships RH cloud too. It's optional on orcharhino.

Author: Thanks for confirming.

Indicates if the host is synchronized to {RHCloud}.

> {ProjectServer} performs the this synchronization itself but only uploads basic information to {RHCloud}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{ProjectServer} performs the synchronization itself but only uploads basic information to {RHCloud}.
```

Author: Applied.

+

> Possible values:

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/theforeman/foreman_rh_cloud/blob/foreman_3_9/app/models/inventory_sync/inventory_status.rb

Author: Fixed values.

+
[options="header"]
|===
| Value | Global Host Status | Number
| Disconnect | Warning | 0
| Sync | OK | 1
|===

> Insights::

Reviewer 2: This is also provided by the rh_cloud, so the same conditions as above apply.

Indicates if the host is synchronized to {RHCloud}.
This synchronization is performend by the host.
The host uploads more information than the {ProjectServer}.
+

> Possible values:

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/theforeman/foreman_rh_cloud/blob/foreman_3_9/app/models/insights_client_report_status.rb

Author: Changed "No report" to "Not reporting" based on the linked file.

+
[options="header"]
|===
| Value | Global Host Status | Number
| Reporting | OK | 0
| No report | Error | 1
|===

> RHEL Lifecycle::

Reviewer 2: This comes from Katello

Author: Thank you, fixed.

> Indicates the current state of the {RHEL} operating system installed of the host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indicates the current state of the {RHEL} operating system installed on the host.
```

Author: Applied.

+

> Possible values:

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/Katello/katello/blob/master/app/models/katello/rhel_lifecycle_status.rb

Author: Thank you for linking the file.
What what I am seeing, everything in this status should be mapped correctly.

+
[options="header"]
|===
| Value | Global Host Status | Number
| Unknown | OK | 0
| Full support | OK | 1
| Maintenance support | OK | 2
| Approaching end of maintenance | Warning | 3
| Extended support | OK | 4
| Approaching end of support | Warning | 5
| Support ended | Error | 6
|===

endif::[]
ifdef::katello,satellite,orcharhino[]
Errata::

> Indicates if Errata available on the host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indicates if Errata is available on the host.
```

Author: Applied.

|===
| Value | Global Host Status | Number
| Fully entitled | OK | 0
| Partially entitled | Warning | 1
| Unentitled | Error | 2
| Unknown | Warning | 3
| Unsubscribed hypervisor | Warning | 4
| SCA enabled | OK | 5
|===

Service level::
+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Value | Global Host Status | Number
| Unknown | OK | 0
| Mismatched | Warning | 1
| Matched | OK | 2
| Not specified | OK | 3
|===

Role::
+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Value | Global Host Status | Number
| Unknown | OK | 0
| Mismatched | Warning | 1
| Matched | OK | 2
| Not specified | OK | 3
|===

Usage::
+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Value | Global Host Status | Number
| Unknown | OK | 0
| Mismatched | Warning | 1
| Matched | OK | 2
| Not specified | OK | 3
|===

Addons::
+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Value | Global Host Status | Number
| Unknown | OK | 0
| Mismatched | Warning | 1
| Matched | OK | 2
| Not specified | OK | 3
|===

System purpose::
+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Value | Global Host Status | Number
| Unknown | OK | 0
| Mismatched | Warning | 1
| Matched | OK | 2
| Not specified | OK | 3
|===

Traces::

> Indicates if the host need a reboot or a process restart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indicates if the host needs a reboot or a process restart.
```

Author: Applied.

+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Value | Global Host Status | Number
| Unknown | Warning | -1
| Up to date | OK | 0
| Required process restart | Error | 1
| Required reboot | Error | 2
|===
endif::[]

There can be more sub-statuses depending on which plug-ins you add to your {Project}.

To view the sub-status for a host, in the {ProjectWebUI}, navigate to *Hosts* > *All Hosts* and click the host whose full status you want to inspect.
You can also view substatus information in the hover help for each host.

> In the *Properties* table of the host details' page, you can view both the global host status and all sub-statuses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the *Properties* table of the host details page, you can view both the global host status and all sub-statuses.
```

Author: Applied.

[id="host-substatus-overview_{context}"]
= Host sub-status overview

A sub-status monitors only a part of a host's capabilities.

To view the sub-statuses of a host, in the {ProjectWebUI}, navigate to *Hosts* > *All Hosts* and click on the host whose full status you want to inspect.
You can view the global host status next to the name of the host and the host sub-statuses on the *Host status* card.

Each sub-status can define its own set of possible values that are mapped to the three global status values.

Below are listed sub-statuses that {Project} contains.
ifdef::foreman-el,foreman-deb,katello[]
There can be more sub-statuses depending on which plug-ins you add to your {Project}.
endif::[]

Configuration::
This sub-status is only relevant if {Project} uses a configuration management system like Ansible, Puppet, or Salt.
+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Label | Global host status
| Alerts disabled | OK
| Active | OK
| Pending | OK
| No changes | OK
| No reports | OK / Warning
| Out of sync | Warning
| Error | Error
|===
+
Additional information about the values of this sub-status:
+

> * *Active*: During the last run, some resources were applied.

Author: Applied.

* *Pending*: During the last configuration, some resources would be applied but your configuration management integration was configured to run in `noop` mode.
* *No changes*: During the last configuration, nothing changed.
* *No reports*: This can be both a *Warning* or *OK* status.

> When there are no reports but the host uses an associated configuration management proxy or the `always_show_configuration_status` setting is set to `true`, it maps to *Warning*.

Reviewer 3: what do you mean by "proxy"? Maybe reword to "{SmartProxy} for configuration management"?

Author: Reworded.

Otherwise it maps to *OK*.
* *Error*: This indicates an error during configuration.
For example, a run failed to install a package.
* *Out of sync*: A configuration report was not received within the expected interval, based on the `outofsync_interval` setting.
Reports are identified by an origin and can have different intervals based upon it.

Build::

> This sub-status is only relevant for managed hosts or hosts registered through global registration.

Author: Changed to hosts provisioned by {Project}.

+
[options="header"]
|===
| Label | Global host status | Number value
| Host was not uploaded to your RH cloud inventory | Warning | 0
| Successfully uploaded to your RH cloud inventory | OK | 1
|===

Insights::
Indicates if the host is synchronized to {RHCloud}.
This synchronization is performend by the host.
The host uploads more information than the {ProjectServer}.
+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Label | Global host status | Number value
| Reporting | OK | 0
| Not reporting | Error | 1
|===

RHEL Lifecycle::
Indicates the current state of the {RHEL} operating system installed on the host.
+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Label | Global host status | Number value
| Unknown | OK | 0
| Full support | OK | 1
| Maintenance support | OK | 2
| Approaching end of maintenance support | Warning | 3
| Extended support | OK | 4
| Approaching end of support | Warning | 5
| Support ended | Error | 6
|===

Errata::
Indicates if Errata is available on the host.
+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Label | Global host status | Number value
| Up to date | OK | 0
| Unknown | Warning | 1
| Needed errata | Error | 2
| Needed security errata | Error | 3
|===

> Subscription::

Reviewer 3: RHEL subscription or Foreman/candlepin subscription?

Author: Red-hat subscription acquired through subscription-manager. Should I make it satellite-only?

Reviewer 3: No, then it'll also affect Foreman/orcharhino. Instead, I would reword this to "RHEL subscription" if possible.

Reviewer 3: I would assume "no" because you don't need a valid subscription for Debian. But you can manage RHEL hosts using Foreman/orcharhino.

I have checked on Foreman 3.9 with SCA off for AlmaLinux 8:

![Screenshot from 2024-02-21 16-04-23](https://github.com/theforeman/foreman-documentation/assets/12595287/b3613014-1c71-4895-a490-e1e6258a81d6)
 
with SCA on, it's green by default (Debian 12):

![image](https://github.com/theforeman/foreman-documentation/assets/12595287/87d477fe-ca7c-4e76-a76a-e28315ffe347)

Author: I guess I should keep it visible for foreman-deb if it's present.

Reviewer 3: If should only be visible for katello,satellite,orcharhino because you can only do content management with Katello plug-in. However, the "Subscription" status refers to the client OS and appears to be valid for all registered hosts (not just RHEL) AFAIK.

Author: So leaving visibility only for katello,satellite,orcharhino.

[id="host-substatus-overview_{context}"]
= Host sub-status overview

A sub-status monitors only a part of a host's capabilities.

To view the sub-statuses of a host, in the {ProjectWebUI}, navigate to *Hosts* > *All Hosts* and click on the host whose full status you want to inspect.
You can view the global host status next to the name of the host and the host sub-statuses on the *Host status* card.

> Each sub-status can define its own set of possible values that are mapped to the three global status values.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each sub-status defines its own set of possible values that are mapped to the three global status values.
```

alternative: "has"?

Author: Applied.

When there are no reports but the host uses an associated {SmartProxy} for configuration management or the `always_show_configuration_status` setting is set to `true`, it maps to *Warning*.
Otherwise it maps to *OK*.
* *Error*: This indicates an error during configuration.
For example, a configuration run failed to install a package.
* *Out of sync*: A configuration report was not received within the expected interval, based on the `outofsync_interval` setting.
Reports are identified by an origin and can have different intervals based upon it.

Build::
This sub-status is only relevant for hosts provisioned from {Project} or hosts registered through global registration.
+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Label | Global host status | Number value
| Installed | OK | 0
| Pending installation | OK | 1
| Token expired | Error | 2
| Installation error | Error | 3
|===

ifndef::foreman-deb[]
Compliance::
Indicates if the host is compliant with OpenSCAP policies.
+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Label | Global host status | Number value
| Compliant | OK | 0
| Inconclusive | Warning | 1
| At least one incompliant | Error | 2
|===
endif::[]

> ifdef::satellite,orcharhino[]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ifndef::foreman-deb[]
```

Unless OVAL is not connected to "foreman_openscap"? https://docs.theforeman.org/nightly/Managing_Security_Compliance/index-katello.html#Security_Content_Automation_Protocol_security-compliance

Author: Well, it is not present on katello build, so I presume it's not gonna be on bare foreman.

Reviewer 4: oval comes from foreman_openscap

Author: @maximiliankolb I'd rather omit it since it is not on bare foreman unless you specifically want me to make it visible.

OVAL scan::
Indicates if there are any vulnerabilities found on the host
+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Label | Global host status | Number value
| No vulnerabilities found | OK | 0
| Vulnerabilities found | Warning | 1
| Vulnerabilities with available patch found | Error | 2
|===
endif::[]

Execution::
Status of the last completed remote excution job.
ifdef::foreman-el,foreman-deb[]
+
Only applies if you have the Remote Execution plug-in installed.
endif::[]
+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Label | Global host status | Number value
| Last execution succeeded / No execution finished yet | OK | 0
| Last execution failed | Error | 1
| Unknown execution status | OK | 2 or 3
| Last execution cancelled | OK | 4
|===

ifdef::satellite,orcharhino,katello[]
Inventory::
Indicates if the host is synchronized to {RHCloud}.
{ProjectServer} performs the synchronization itself but only uploads basic information to {RHCloud}.

> +

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
+
ifdef::orcharhino[]
+
Only applies if you have the Red Hat Cloud plug-in installed.
endif::[]
```

See https://docs.theforeman.org/3.9/Managing_Hosts/index-orcharhino.html#Installing_Red_Hat_Cloud_Plug_in_managing-hosts

You can also drop "katello" from line 108.

Author: Applied.

Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Label | Global host status | Number value
| Host was not uploaded to your RH cloud inventory | Warning | 0
| Successfully uploaded to your RH cloud inventory | OK | 1
|===

Insights::
Indicates if the host is synchronized to {RHCloud}.
This synchronization is performend by the host.
The host uploads more information than the {ProjectServer}.
+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Label | Global host status | Number value
| Reporting | OK | 0
| Not reporting | Error | 1
|===

> Errata::

Reviewer 3: Errata should be "katello,satellite,orcharhino". please add "endif" here and another "ifdef:katello,satellite,orcharhino" below. see my other comment above.

| Vulnerabilities found | Warning | 1
| Vulnerabilities with available patch found | Error | 2
|===
endif::[]

Execution::
Status of the last completed remote excution job.
ifdef::foreman-el,foreman-deb[]
+
Only applies if you have the Remote Execution plug-in installed.
endif::[]
+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Label | Global host status | Number value
| Last execution succeeded / No execution finished yet | OK | 0
| Last execution failed | Error | 1
| Unknown execution status | OK | 2 or 3
| Last execution cancelled | OK | 4
|===

ifdef::satellite,orcharhino[]
Inventory::
Indicates if the host is synchronized to {RHCloud}.
{ProjectServer} performs the synchronization itself but only uploads basic information to {RHCloud}.
ifdef::orcharhino[]
+
Only applies if you have the Red Hat Cloud plug-in installed.
endif::[]
+
Possible values:
+
[options="header"]
|===
| Label | Global host status | Number value
| Host was not uploaded to your RH cloud inventory | Warning | 0
| Successfully uploaded to your RH cloud inventory | OK | 1
|===

Insights::
Indicates if the host is synchronized to {RHCloud}.
This synchronization is performend by the host.

> The host uploads more information than the {ProjectServer}.

Reviewer 3: Do you mean "_to_ your {ProjectServer}"?

Author: No. Both host and the project server upload information to RH cloud, but project server only uploads basic info, whereas host uploads more extensive info.

A sub-status monitors only part of a host's capabilities.

> Currently, {Project} ships with the following sub-statuses:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{Project} contains the following sub-statuses:
```

* Execution
* Configuration {endash} relevant if {Project} uses a configuration management system like Ansible, Puppet, or Salt.
* Build {endash} relevant for managed hosts and when {Project} runs in unattended mode.
* Compliance
* OVAL scan
ifdef::satellite,katello,orcharhino[]
* Inventory
* Insights
* Errata
* Subscription
* Service level
* Role
* Usage
* Addons
* System purpose
* Traces
endif::[]

> There can be more sub-statuses depending on which plugins you add to your {Project}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There can be more sub-statuses depending on which plug-ins you add to your {Project}.
```
